good evening from the Ford Center for
the Performing Arts at the University of
Mississippi and Oxford
I'm Jim Lehrer of the NewsHour on PBS
and I welcome you to the first of the
2008 presidential debates between the
Republican nominee Senator John McCain
of Arizona and the Democratic nominee
Senator Barack Obama of Illinois the
Commission on Presidential Debates is
the sponsor of this event and the three
other presidential and vice presidential
debates coming in October
tonight's will primarily be about
foreign policy and national security
which by definition includes the global
financial crisis it will be divided
roughly into nine minute segments direct
exchanges between the candidates and
moderator follow-ups are permitted after
each candidate has two minutes to answer
the lead question in an order determined
by a coin toss the specific subjects and
questions were chosen by me they have
not been shared or cleared with anyone
the audience here in the hall is
promised to remain silent
no cheers no applause no noise of any
kind except right now as we welcome
senators Obama and McCain
let me begin with something General
Eisenhower said in his 1952 presidential
campaign quote we must achieve both
security and solvency
in fact the foundation of military
strength is economic strength end quote
with that in mind the first lead
question gentlemen at this very moment
tonight where do you stand on the
financial recovery plan first response
to use and Obama you have two minutes
well thank you very much Jim and thanks
to the Commission and the University of
Mississippi Ole Miss for hosting us
tonight I can't think of a more
important time for us to talk about the
future of the country you know we are at
a defining moment in our history our
nation is involved in two wars and we
are going through the worst financial
crisis since the Great Depression and
although we've heard a lot about Wall
Street
those of you on Main Street I think have
been struggling for a while and you
recognize that this could have an impact
on all sectors of the economy and you're
wondering how's it gonna affect me how's
it gonna affect my job how's it gonna
affect my house how's going to affect my
retirement savings or my ability to send
my children to college so we have to
move swiftly and we have to move wisely
and I've put forward a series of
proposals that make sure that we protect
taxpayers as we engage in this important
rescue effort number one we've got to
make sure that we've got oversight over
this whole process seven hundred billion
dollars potentially is a lot of money
number two we've got to make sure that
taxpayers when they are putting their
money at risk have the possibility of
getting that money back and gains if the
market and when the market returns
number three we've got to make sure that
none of that money is going to pad CEO
bank accounts or to promote golden
parachutes and number four we've got to
make sure that we're helping homeowners
because the root problem here has to do
with the foreclosures that are taking
place all across the country now we also
have to recognize that
this is a final verdict on eight years
of failed economic policies promoted by
George Bush supported by Senator McCain
the theory that basically says that we
can shred regulations and consumer
protections and give more and more to
the most and somehow prosperity will
trickle down it hasn't worked and I
think that the fundamentals the economy
have to be measured by whether or not
the middle class is getting a fair shake
that's why I'm running for president and
that's what I hope we're going to be
talking about tonight Senator McCain two
minutes well thank you Jim and thanks to
everybody and I do have a sad note
tonight senator Kennedy is in the
hospital
he's dearly beloved friend to all of us
our thoughts and prayers go out to the
Lion of the Senate I also want to thank
the University of Mississippi for
hosting us tonight and TMI I've been not
feeling too great about a lot of things
lately so of a lot of Americans who are
facing challenges but I'm feeling a
little better tonight and I'll tell you
why because as we're here tonight in
this debate we are seeing for the first
time in a long time Republicans and
Democrats together sitting down trying
to work out a solution to this fiscal
crisis that we're in and have no doubt
about the magnitude of this crisis and
we're not talking about failure of
institutions on Wall Street we're
talking about failures on Main Street
and people who will lose their jobs and
their credits and their homes if we
don't fix the greatest fiscal crisis
probably you know certainly in our time
and I've been around a little while but
the point is the point is we have
finally seen Republicans and Democrats
sitting down and negotiating together
and coming up with a package this
package has transparency in it it has to
have accountability and oversight it has
to have options for loans to failing
businesses rather than the government
taking over those loans we have to it
has to have a package with a number of
other essential elements to it and yes I
went back to Washington
and I met with my Republicans in the
House of Representatives and they
weren't part of the negotiations and and
I understand that and it was the House
Republicans that decided that they would
be part of the solution of this problem
but I want to emphasize one point to all
Americans tonight this isn't the
beginning and the end of this crisis
this is the end of the beginning if we
come out with a package that will keep
these institutions stable and we've got
a lot of work to do and we've got to
create jobs and one of the areas of
course is to eliminate our dependence on
foreign oil all right let's go back to
my question how you all stand on the
recovery plan and talk to each other
about it where do i weaken we've got
five minutes we can negotiate a deal
right here but I mean are you you favor
this plan senator Obama and when you
Senate is Senator McCain to you are you
in favor of this plan we haven't seen
the language yet and I do think that
there's constructive work being done out
there so for the viewers who are
watching I am optimistic about the
capacity of us to come together with a
plan the question I think that we have
to ask ourselves is how did we get into
this situation in the first place two
years ago I warned that because of the
subprime lending mess because of the
lacs regulation that we were potentially
gonna have a problem and tried to stop
some of the abuses and mortgages that
were taking place at the time last year
I wrote to the secretary of the Treasury
to make sure that he understood the
magnitude of this problem and to call on
him to bring all the stakeholders
together to try to deal with it so so
the question I think that we've got to
ask ourselves is yes we've got to solve
this problem short term and we are going
to have to intervene there's no doubt
about that but we're also going to have
to look at how is it that we shredded so
many regulations we did not set up a
21st century regulatory framework to
deal with these problems and that in
part has to do with an economic
philosophy that says that regulation is
always bad are you going to vote for the
plan say aye
so and I is the United States you're
gonna vote for the plaster but let me
point out I also warned about Fannie Mae
and Freddie Mac and warned about
corporate greed and access and CEO pay
and all that a lot of us saw this
trainwreck coming but there's also the
issue of responsibility
you've mentioned President Dwight David
Eisenhower President Eisenhower on the
night before the Normandy invasion went
into his room and he wrote out two
letters one of them was a letter
congratulating the great members of the
military and allies that had conducted
and succeeded in the greatest invasion
in history still to this day and forever
and he wrote out another letter and that
was a letter of resignation from the
United States Army for the failure of
the landings at Normandy somehow we've
lost that accountability I've been
heavily criticized because I called for
the resignation of the chairman of the
Securities and Exchange Commission we've
got to start also holding people
accountable and we've got to reward
people who succeed but somehow in
Washington today and I'm afraid on Wall
Street greed is rewarded excess is
rewarded and corruption or certainly
failure to carry out our responsibility
is rewarded as president United States
people are going to be held accountable
in my administration and I promise you
that'll happen do you have a something
directly to say senator Obama to Senator
McCain about what he just said well I
think McCain is absolutely right that we
need more responsibility but we need it
not just when there's a crisis I mean
we've had years in which the reigning
economic ideology has been what's good
for Wall Street but not what's good for
Main Street and there are folks out
there who've been struggling before this
crisis took place and that's why it's so
important as we solve this short-term
problem that we look at some of the
underlying issues that have led to wages
and incomes for ordinary Americans to go
down the health care system that is
broken energy policies that are not
working because
you know ten days ago John said that the
fundamentals the economy are there say
it directly to him the and be afraid I
couldn't hear him I'm just determined to
get you all to talk to each other I'm
gonna try and and I just fundamentally
disagree and unless we are holding
ourselves accountable day-in day-out not
just when there's the folks who have
power and influence and can hire
lobbyists but for the nurse the teacher
the police officer who frankly at the
end of each month they've got a little
financial crisis going on they're having
to take out extra debt just to make
their mortgage payments we haven't been
paying attention to them and if you look
at our tax policies it's a classic
example so Senator McCain do you agree
with what senator Obama just said and if
you don't tell him what you disagree
with no I look we've got to fix the
system we got fundamental problems in
the system and Main Street is paying a
penalty for the excesses in greed in
Washington DC and in The Wall Street so
there's no doubt that we have a long way
to go
and obviously stricter interpretation
and consolidation of the various
regulatory agencies that weren't doing
their job that is brought on this crisis
but I have a fundamental belief in the
goodness and strength of the American
worker and the American worker is the
most productive most innovative America
is still the greatest producer exporter
and importer but we've got to get
through these times but I have a
fundamental belief in the United States
of America and I still believe under the
right leadership our best days are ahead
of us all right let's go to the next
lead question which is essentially
following up on the same subject and you
get two minutes to begin with Senator
McCain and using your word fundamental
are there fundamental differences
between your approach and Senator
Obama's approach to what you would do as
president
to lead this country out of the
financial crisis well the first thing we
have to do is get spending under control
in Washington it's completely out of
control it's gone we have now presided
over the largest increase in the size of
government since the Great Society we
Republicans came to power to change
government and government changed us and
the the worst symptom of this disease is
what my friend Tom Coburn calls a year
marking as a gateway drug because it's a
gateway it's a gateway to out-of-control
spending and corruption and we have
former members of Congress now residing
in federal prison because of the evils
of this year marking and pork-barrel
spending you know we spent three million
dollars to study the DNA of bears in
Montana I don't know if that was a
criminal issue or a paternal issue but
the fact is that it was three million
dollars of our taxpayers money and it
has got to be brought under control as
president the United States
I want to assure you I've got a pen this
one's kind of old I've got a pen and I'm
gonna veto every single spending bill
that comes across my desk I will make
them famous that you will know their
names now senator Obama you wanted to
won't know one of the differences he has
asked for 932 million dollars of the
earmark pork-barrel spending nearly a
million dollars for every day that he's
been in the United States Senate
I suggest that people go up on the
website of sensitive citizens against
government waste and they'll look at
those projects that kind of thing is not
the way to rein in runaway spending in
Washington DC that's one of the
fundamental differences that Senator
Obama and I have senator Obama two
minutes well Senator McCain is
absolutely right that the earmarks
process has been abused which is why I
suspended any request for my home state
whether it was for senior centers or
what-have-you until we cleaned it up and
he's also right that oftentimes
lobbyists and special interests are the
ones that are introducing these kinds of
requests although that wasn't the case
with me but let's be clear
earmarks account for 18 billion dollars
in last year's budget Senator McCain is
proposing and this is a fundamental
difference between us 300 billion
dollars in tax cuts to some of the
wealthiest corporations and individuals
in the country 300 billion dollars now
18 billion dollars is important 300
billion dollars is really important and
in his tax plan you would have CEOs of
Fortune 500 companies getting an average
of 700,000 dollars in reduced taxes
while leaving a hundred million
Americans out so my attitude is we've
got to grow the economy from the bottom
up what I've called for is a tax cut for
95 percent of working families 95
percent and that means that the ordinary
American out there who's collecting a
paycheck every day they've got a little
extra money to be able to buy a computer
for their kid to fill up on this gas
that is killing them and over time that
I think is going to be a better recipe
for economic growth than the the
policies of President Bush that John
McCain wants to wants to follow say
McCain well again I don't mean to go
back and forth but senator Obama
suspended those requests for pork barrel
projects after he was running for
president you knighted States he didn't
happen to see that light during the
first three years as a member of the
United States Senate 932 million dollars
in requests maybe to senator Obama is
not a lot of money but the point is that
you see I hear this all the time it's
only 18 billion dollars do you know that
it's tripled in the last five years do
you know that it's gone completely out
of control
to the point where it corrupts people it
corrupts people that's why we have as I
said people under federal indictment and
charges it's a system that's got to be
cleaned up I have fought against it my
career I have fought against it I was
called the sheriff by the one of the
senior members of the Appropriations
Committee I didn't win Miss Kay
reality in the United States Senate now
senator Obama didn't mention that along
with his tax cuts he is also proposing
some eight hundred billion dollars in
new spending on new programs now that's
a fundamental difference between myself
and Senator Obama I want to cut spending
I want to keep taxes low the worst thing
we could do in this economic climate is
to raise people's taxes I don't know
where Jon's getting his figures let's
just be clear what I do is I close
corporate loopholes stop providing tax
cuts to corporations that are shipping
jobs overseas so that we're giving tax
breaks to companies that are investing
here in the United States I make sure
that we have a health care system that
allows for everyone to have basic
coverage I think those are pretty
important priorities and I pay for every
diamond but let's go back to the
original point John nobody's denying
that 18 billion dollars is important and
absolutely we need earmark reform and
when I'm president I will go line by
line to make sure that we are not
spending money unwisely but the fact is
that eliminating earmarks alone is not a
recipe for how we're going to get the
middle class back on track and when you
look at your tax policies that are
directed primarily at those who are
doing well and you are neglecting people
who are really struggling right now I
think that is a continuation of the last
eight years and we can't afford another
for respond directly to him about that
to just senator Obama about that about
the the he's made it twice now about
your tax and your policies about taxes
well let me give you an example of what
senator Obama finds objectionable the
business tax right now the United States
of America in business pays the
second-highest business taxes in the
world
35% Ireland pays 11% now if you're a
business person and you can locate any
place out in the world then obviously if
you go to the country where as 11
percent tax versus 35 you're going to be
able to create jobs increase your
business make more investment etc I want
to cut that visit
his tax I want to cut it so that
businesses will remain and in the United
States of America and create jobs but
again I want to return it's a lot more
than 18 billion dollars in pork barrel
spending I can tell you it's right it's
throughout the United States Senate will
take up a continuing resolution tomorrow
or the next day sometime next week with
two thousand two thousand look at them
my friends look at them you'll be
appalled and Senator Obama as a recent
convert after requesting 932 million
dollars worth of pork barrel spending
projects so the point is I want people
to have tax cuts I want every family to
have a $5,000 refundable tax credit so
they can go out and purchase their own
health care I want to double the
dividend from $3,500 to $7,000 for every
dependent child in America I know that
the worst thing we could possibly do is
to raise taxes on anybody and a lot of
people might be interested in Senator
Obama's definition of rich so no bomb
you have a question for Senator well let
me just make a couple of points my
definition
here's what I can tell the American
people 95% of you will get a tax cut and
if you make less than $250,000 less than
a quarter million dollars a year then
you will not see one dimes worth of tax
increase
now John mentioned the fact that
business taxes on paper are high in this
country and he's absolutely right
here's the problem there are so many
loopholes that have been written into
the tax code oftentimes with support of
Senator McCain that we actually see our
businesses pay effectively one of the
lowest tax rates in the world and what
that means then is that there are people
out there who are working every day who
are not getting a tax cut and you want
to give them more it's not like you want
to close the loopholes you just want to
add additional tax cut over the
loopholes and that's a problem just one
last point I want to make sense Senator
McCain talked about
providing a $5,000 health credit now
what he doesn't tell you is that he
intends to for the first time in history
tax health benefits so you may end up
getting a $5,000 tax credit here's the
only problem your employer now has to
pay taxes on the health care that you're
getting from your employer and if you
end up losing your health care from your
employer you've got to go out on the
open market and try to buy it it is not
a good deal for the American people but
it's an example of this notion that the
market can always solve everything and
that the less regulation we have the
better off we're going to be well you
know let me just we have to but this is
a classic example of walking the walk
and talking the talk we had an energy
bill before the United States Senate it
was festooned with Christmas tree
ornaments it had all kinds of breaks for
the oil companies I mean billions of
dollars worth I've voted against it
senator Obama voted for it you've got a
look at our records that's the important
thing who fought against wasteful and an
earmark spending who has been the person
who has tried to keep spending under
control who is the person who is
believed that the best thing for America
is is to have a tax system that is
fundamentally fair and I fought to
simplify it and I have proposals to
simplify it
let's give every American a choice two
tax brackets generous dividends and and
two and let Americans choose whether
they want the the existing tax code or
they want a new tax code and so again
look at the record particularly the
energy bill but again Catholic senator
Obama has shifted on a number of
occasions he has voted in the United
States Senate to increase taxes on
people who make as low as $42,000 a year
that's just a fact again you can look it
up look it's just not true and if we
want to talk about oil company profits
under your tax plan John this is
undeniable oil companies would get an
additional four billion dollars in tax
breaks now
look we all would love to lower taxes on
everybody but here's the problem if we
are giving them to all companies then
that means that there are those who are
not going to be getting them you know
Gann Fann already when he ate them to
the oil company the the fact of the
matter is is that I was opposed to those
tax breaks tried to strip them out we've
got an energy bill on the Senate floor
right now that contains some good stuff
some stuff you want including drilling
offshore but you're opposed to it
because it would strip away those tax
breaks that have gone to oil companies
right all right speaking of things that
both of you want mm-hmm another lead
question and it has to do with the
rescue sister financial rescue thing
that we started that I started asking
about and what and you're the first
answers to you senator Obama as
president as a result whatever financial
rescue plan comes about and the billions
7rb and whatever it is it's going to
cause what are you going to have to give
up in terms of the priorities that you
would bring as president of the United
States as a result of having to pay for
the financial rescue plan well there are
a range of things that are probably
gonna have to be delayed we don't yet
know what our tax revenues are going to
be the economy is slowing down so it's
hard to anticipate right now what the
budgets going to look like next year but
there's no doubt that we're not gonna be
able to do everything that I think needs
to be done there are some things that I
think have to be done we have to have
energy independence so I've put forward
a plan to make sure that in ten years
time we have freed ourselves from
dependence on Middle Eastern oil by
increasing production at home but most
importantly by starting to invest in
alternative energy solar wind biodiesel
making sure that we're developing the
fuel-efficient cars of the future right
here in the United States and Ohio and
Michigan instead of Japan and South
Korea we have to fix our health care
system which is putting an enormous
burden on families just a report just
came out that the average deductible
went up 30% on American families they
are getting
and many of them are going bankrupt as a
consequence of health care I'm meeting
folks all over the country we have to do
that now because it'll actually make our
businesses and our families better off
the third thing we have to do is we've
got to make sure that we're competing in
education we've got to invest in science
and technology China and a space launch
and a space walk we've got to make sure
that our children are keeping pace in
math and in science and one of the
things I think we have to do is make
sure that college is affordable for
every young person in America and I also
think that we're gonna have to rebuild
our infrastructure which is falling
behind
our roads our bridges but also broadband
lines to reach into rural communities
also making sure that we have a new
electricity grid to get the alternative
energy to population centers that are
using them so there's some some things
that we've got to do structurally to
make sure that we can compete in this
global economy we can't shortchange
those things we've got to eliminate
programs that don't work and we've got
to make sure that the programs that we
do have are more efficient and cost less
I what priorities would you adjust as
president Senator McCain because of them
because of the financial bailout cause
look we no matter what we've got to cut
spending we have as I said we've let
government get completely out of control
senator Obama has the most liberal
voting record in the United States
Senate it's hard to reach across the
aisle from that far to the left the
point the point is the point is we need
to examine every agency of government
first of all by the way I'd eliminate
ethanol subsidies I oppose ethanol
subsidies I think that we have to return
particularly in defense spending which
is the largest part of our
appropriations we have to do away with
cost-plus contracts we now have defense
systems that the costs are completely
out of control we tried to build a
little ship called the littoral combat
ship that was supposed to cost a hundred
and forty million dollars ended up
costing four hundred million dollars and
we still haven't done it
so we need to have fixed costs of
contracts we need very badly to
understand that defense span
is very important and vital particularly
in the new challenges we face in the
world but we have to get a lot of the
cost overruns under control I know how
to do that I saved the taxpayers 6.8
billion dollars by fighting a contract
that was negotiated between Boeing and
DOD that was completely wrong and we
fixed it and we killed it and people
ended up in federal prison so I know how
to do this because I've been involved in
these issues for many many years but I
think that we have to examine every
agency of government and find out those
that are doing their job and keep them
and find out those that aren't and
eliminate them and we all have to scrub
every agency of government but if I hear
the two of you correctly neither one of
you is suggesting any major changes in
what you want to do as president as a
result of the financial bailout is that
what you as I said before Jim there are
going to be things that end up having to
be farted and delayed
well look the I want to make sure that
we are investing in energy in order to
free ourselves from dependence on
foreign oil
mm-hmm now that is a big project that is
a multi-year but you're not willing to
get that well I'm not willing to give up
the need to do it but there may be
individual components of it that we
can't do but but John's right that we've
got to make some cuts we right now give
15 billion dollars every year as
subsidies to private insurers under the
Medicare system doesn't work any better
through this private insurers they just
skim off 15 billion dollars that was a
giveaway and part of the reason is
because lobbyists are able to shape how
Medicare works they did it on the
prescription drug bill they've done it
with respect to Medicare and we are
going to have to change the culture one
of the you know Tom John mentioned me
being wildly liberal mostly that's just
me opposing George Bush's
wrongheaded policies since that I've
since I've been in Congress but I think
that it is also important to recognize
that I worked with Tom Coburn the most
conservative one of the most
conservative Republicans
John already mentioned to set up what we
call a Google for government which says
that we are going to list every dollar
of federal spending to make sure that
the taxpayer can take a look and see who
in fact is is promoting some of these
spending projects that John's been
railing about well I'm trying to get at
least this excuse me if I'm a senator is
trying to get at that you all one of you
is going to be the president states come
January after in a minute the in the
middle of a huge financial crisis that
is yet to be resolved and what I'm
trying to get at is how this is going to
affect you not in very specific small
ways but in major ways and the approach
you would take as to the presidency well
how about a spending freeze on
everything but defense Veteran Affairs
and entitlement spending freeze I think
we ought to seriously consider with the
exceptions of caring for our veterans
national defense and several other vital
issues would you go for that well the
problem is spending freezes you're using
a hatchet where you need a scalpel
there are some programs that are very
important that are currently under
funding I want to increase the early
childhood education and the notion that
we should freeze that when there may be
for example this Medicare subsidy I
think doesn't make sense let me tell you
another place where I'd like to look for
some savings we're currently spending
ten billion dollars a month in Iraq when
they have a seventy nine billion dollar
surplus it seems to me that if we're
going to be strong at home as well as
strong abroad that we've got to look at
bringing that war to a close but we're
sending 700 billion dollars a year
overseas to countries that don't like us
very much some of that money ends up in
the hands of terrorist organizations we
have to have the wind tied solar natural
gas flex fuel cars and all right but we
also have to have offshore drilling and
we also have to have nuclear power
Senator Obama opposes both storing and
reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel you
can't get there from here and the fact
is that we can create 700,000 jobs by
building constructing 45 new nuclear
power plants by the year 2030 nuclear
power is
not only important as far as eliminating
our dependence on foreign oil but it's
also important as far as climate change
is concerned an issue that I have been
involved in for many many years and I'm
proud of the work that I've done there
along with Senator Clinton
let me see before we go to another lead
question let me see if I could figure
out a way to again that's the same
question a different funny different way
here are you are you willing to
acknowledge both of you that this
financial crisis is going to affect the
way you rule the country as president of
the United States beyond the kinds of
things that you've already something is
it a major move is it I'm going to have
a major there is no doubt that it's
gonna affect our budgets there is no
doubt about it
the not only even if we get all seven
hundred billion dollars back let's
assume the markets recover
we're holding assets long enough that
eventually taxpayers get it back and
that happened during the Great
Depression when Roosevelt purchased a
whole bunch of homes over time home
values went back up and in fact
government made a profit if we're lucky
and we do it right that could
potentially happen but in the short term
there's an outlet and we may not see
that money for a while and because the
economy is slowing down I think we can
also expect less tax revenue so there's
no doubt that as president I'm gonna
have to make some tough decisions the
only point I want to make is this that
in order to make those tough decisions
we've got to know what our values are
and who we're fighting for and what our
priorities are and if we are spending
three hundred billion dollars on tax
cuts for people who don't need them and
weren't even asking for them and we are
leaving out health care which is
crushing on people all across the
country then I think we have made a bad
decision and I want to make sure we're
not shortchanging our long-term
priorities well I want to make sure that
we're not handing the health care system
over to the federal government which is
basically what it would ultimately
happen with Senator Obama's health care
plan
I want the families to make the
decisions between themselves and their
deceit and their and their doctors not
the federal government look
we have to obviously cut spending I have
fought to cut spending senator Obama has
eight hundred billion dollars in new
spending programs I would suggest he
start by canceling some of those new
spending programs that he has we can I
think adjust spending around to take
care of the very much needed programs
including taking care of our veterans
but I also want to say again a healthy
economy with low taxes with not raising
anyone's taxes is probably the best
recipe for eventually having our economy
recover and a spending restraint has got
to be a vital part of that and the
reason one of the major reasons why
we're in the difficulties were in today
is because spending got out of control
we all shine a five hundred billion
dollars and spending I know can be
brought under control because I have
fought against excessive spending my
entire career and I got plans to reduce
and eliminate unnecessary and wasteful
spending and if there's anybody here who
thinks there aren't agencies of
government where spending can be cut in
their budgets slashed they have not
spent a lot of time but I just have to
make this point Jim John it's been your
president who you said you agreed with
90% of the time who presided over this
increase in spending this orgy of
spending and enormous deficits and you
voted for almost all of his budgets so
to stand here after eight years and say
that you're going to lead on controlling
spending and you know balancing our tax
cuts so that they help middle-class
families won over the last eight years
that hasn't happened I think just is
kind of hard to swallow quick-response
well it's well known that I have not
been elected Miss Congeniality in the
United States Senate nor with the
administration I have opposed the
President on spending on climate change
on torture of prisoners on on Guantanamo
Bay
on a long on the way that the Iraq war
was conducted I have a long record and
the American people know me very well
all right that is independent and a
maverick of the Senate and I'm happy to
say that I've got a partner that's a
good maverick along with me now all
right let's go to another subject lead
question two minutes to you Senator
McCain much has been said about the
lessons of Vietnam what do you see as
the lessons of Iraq I think the lessons
of Iraq are very clear that you cannot
have a failed strategy that will then
cause you to nearly lose a conflict our
initial military success we went into
Baghdad and everybody celebrated and
then the war was very badly mishandled I
went to Iraq in 2003 and came back and
said we've got to change this strategy
this strategy requires additional troops
it requires an in fundamental change in
strategy and I fought for it and finally
we came up with a great general and a
strategy that has succeeded this
strategy has succeeded and we are
winning in Iraq and we will come home
with victory and with honor and that
withdrawal is the result of every
counter insurgency that succeeds and I
want to tell you that now that we will
succeed and our troops will come home
and not in defeat that we will see a
stable ally in the region and a
fledgling democracy the consequences of
defeat would have been increased Iranian
influence it would have been increase in
sectarian violence it would have been a
wider war which the United States of
America might have had to come back so
there was a lot at stake there and
thanks to this great General David
Petraeus and the troops who serve under
him they have succeeded and we are
winning in Iraq and we will come home
and we will come home as we have when we
have won other Wars and not in defeat
two minutes for how you see the lessons
of erection Obama well this is an area
where Senator McCain and I have a
fundamental difference because I think
the first question is whether we should
have gone into the war in the first
place now six years ago I stood up and
opposed this war at a time when it was
politically risky to do so because I
said that not only did we not know how
much it was going to cost what our exit
strategy might be how it would affect
our relationships around the world and
whether our intelligence was sound but
also because we hadn't finished the job
in Afghanistan we hadn't caught bin
Laden we hadn't put al-qaida to rest and
as a consequence I thought that it was
going to be a distraction now Senator
McCain and President Bush had a very
different judgment and I wish I'd been
wrong for the sake of the country and
may have been right but that's not the
case we've spent over 600 billion
dollars so far soon to be a trillion we
have lost over 4,000 lives we have seen
30,000 wounded and most importantly from
the strategic national security
perspective al Qaeda is resurgent
stronger now that at any time since 2001
we took our eye off the ball and not to
mention that we are still spending ten
billion dollars a month when they have a
79 billion dollar surplus at a time when
we are in great distress here at home
and we just talked about the fact that
our budget is way over stretched and we
are borrowing money from overseas to try
to finance just some of the basic
functions of our government so I think
the lesson to be drawn is that we should
never hesitate to use military force and
I will not as president in order to keep
the American people safe but we have to
use our military wisely and we did not
use our military wisely you know what
thank you agree that our lesson of Iraq
on the next prize in the United States
is not going to have to address the
issue as to whether we went into Iraq or
not next president united states is that
going to have to decide how we leave
when we leave and what we leave behind
that's the decision of the next
president United States Senator Obama
said the surge could not work said it
would increase sectarian violence said
it was doomed to failure recently on a
television program he said it exceeded
our wildest expectations but yet after
conceding that he still says that he
would oppose the surge if he had to
decide that again today incredibly
incredibly senator Obama didn't go to
Iraq for 900 days and never asked for a
meeting with General Petraeus well let's
go Bhama is the chairperson of a
committee that oversights NATO that's in
Afghanistan to this day he's never had a
hearing back up the point about your not
having been look I'd be I'm very proud
of my advice presidential selection Joe
Biden who's the chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee and as he
explains and as John well knows the
issues of Afghanistan the issues of Iraq
critical issues like that don't go
through my subcommittee because they're
done as a committee as a whole but
that's Senate inside baseball but let's
get back to the core issue here Senator
McCain is absolutely right that the
violence has been reduced as a
consequence of the extraordinary
sacrifice of our troops and our military
families they have done a brilliant job
and General Petraeus has done a
brilliant job but understand that was a
tactic designed to contain the damage of
the previous four years of mismanagement
of this war and so so John likes John
you like to pretend like the war started
in 2007 you talked about the surge the
war started in 2003 and the and at the
time when the war started you said it
was going to be quick and easy you said
we knew where the weapons of mass
destruction were you were wrong you said
that we were going to be greeted as
liberators you were wrong you said that
it there was no history of violence
between Shia and Sunni and you were
wrong
judgment whether whether or not if the
question is who is best equipped as the
next president to make good decisions
about how we use our military how we
make sure that we are prepared and ready
for the next conflict again I think we
can take a look at our judgment I'm
afraid I'm afraid senator Obama doesn't
understand the difference between a
tactic and a strategy but the important
I'd like to tell you - fourth of July
ago I was in Baghdad General Petraeus
invited Senator Lindsey Graham and me to
attend a ceremony were 688 brave young
Americans whose enlistment had expired
were rien listening to stay and fight
for Iraqi Freedom and American freedom I
was honored to be there I was honored to
speak to those troops and you know
afterwards we spent a lot of time with
him and you know what they said to us he
said let us win he said let us win we
don't want our kids coming back here and
this strategy and this general they are
winning senator Obama refuses to
acknowledge that we are winning in Iraq
they just passed an electoral an
election law just in the last few days
there is social economic progress and a
strategy a strategy of going into an
area clearing and holding and the people
of the country then become allied with
you they inform on the bad guys and
peace comes to the country and
prosperity that's what's happening in
Iraq and it wasn't a tactic let me see
that same strategy will be employed in
Afghanistan by this great general and
Senator Obama who after promising not to
vote to cut off funds for the troops did
the incredible thing of voting to cut
off the funds for the troops in Iraq and
they're a whole bunch of things we got
to answer first of all let's talk about
this this troop funding issue because
John always brings this up Senator
McCain cut
Senator McCain opposed funding for
troops in legislation that had a
timetable
because he didn't believe in a timetable
I opposed funding a mission that had no
timetable and was open-ended giving a
blank check to George Bush we had a
difference on the timetable we didn't
have a difference on whether or not we
were gonna be funding troops we had a
legitimate difference and I absolutely
understand the difference between
tactics and strategy and the strategic
question that the president has to ask
is not whether or not we are employing a
particular approach in the country once
we have made the decision to be there
the question is was this wise we have
seen Afghanistan worsen deteriorating we
need more troops there we need more
resources there Senator McCain in the
rush to go into Iraq said you know what
we've been successful in Afghanistan
there is nobody who can pose a threat to
us there this is a time when bin laden
was still out and now they've
reconstituted themselves Secretary of
Defense Robert Gates himself
acknowledges the war on terrorism
started in Afghanistan and it needs to
end there but we can't do it if we are
not willing to give Iraq back its
country now what I've said is we should
end this war responsibly we should do it
in phases but in 16 months we should be
able to reduce our combat troops put
provide some relief to military families
and our troops and bolster our efforts
in Afghanistan so that we can capture
and kill bin Laden and crush al Qaeda
and right now the commander's in
Afghanistan as well as Admiral Mullen
have acknowledged that we don't have
enough troops to deal with Afghanistan
because we still have more troops in
Iraq than we did before the surge
Admiral Mullen suggests that Senator
Obama's of a plan is dangerous that's
not a case that's what what draw would
be and also General Petraeus had the
same thing Osama bin Laden and General
Petraeus have one thing in common that I
know of they both said that Iraq is the
central battleground now General
Petraeus has praised the successes but
he said those successes are fragile
if we set a specific date for withdrawal
and by the way senator Obama's original
plan they would have been out last
spring before this surgery ever had a
chance to succeed and I and I'm I'm
understand why senator Obama was
surprised and said that the surge
succeeded beyond his wildest
expectations didn't exceed beyond mine
because I know that that's a strategy
that has worked and can succeed but if
we snatch defeat from the jaws of
victory and adopt senator Obama's plan
then we will have a wider war and it'll
make things more complicated throughout
the region including in Afghanistan
Afghanistan lead a new a new lead
question now having resolved Iraq will
move and it goes to you senator Obama
and it's it's a it picks up on a point
that's already been made do you think
more true more US troops should be sent
to Afghanistan how many and when yes I
think we need more troops I've been
saying that for over a year now and I
think that we have to do it as quickly
as possible because it's been
acknowledged by the commanders on the
ground the situation is getting worse
not better we had the highest fatalities
among US troops this past year than any
time since 2002 and we are seeing major
offensive taking place al Qaeda and
Taliban crossing the border and
attacking our troops in a brazen fashion
they are feeling emboldened and we
cannot separate Afghanistan from Iraq
because what our commanders have said is
we don't have the troops right now to
deal with Afghanistan so I would send
two to three additional brigades to
Afghanistan I'll keep in mind that we
have four times the number of troops in
Iraq where nobody had anything to do
with 9/11 before we went in where in
fact there was no al-qaeda before we
went in but we have four times more
troops there than we do in Afghanistan
and that is a strategic mistake because
every intelligence agency will
acknowledge that al-qaeda is the
greatest threat against the United
States and that Secretary of Defense
gates acknowledged the central front
that the place where we had
to deal with these folks is going to be
in Afghanistan and in Pakistan so here's
what we have to do comprehensively
though it's not just more troops we have
to press the Afghan government to make
certain that they are actually working
for their people and I've said this to
President Karzai number two we've got to
deal with a growing poppy trade that has
exploded over the last several years
number three we've got to deal with
Pakistan because al-qaeda and the
Taliban have safe havens in Pakistan
across the border in the Northwest
regions and although you know under
George Bush with the support of Senator
McCain we've been given them ten billion
dollars over the last seven years they
have not done what needs to be done to
get rid of those safe havens and until
we do Americans here at home are not
going to be safe
Afghanistan Senator McCain first of all
I won't repeat the mistake that I regret
enormous Lee and that is after we were
able to help the Afghan freedom fighters
and drive the Russians out of
Afghanistan we basically washed our
hands of the region and the result over
time was the Taliban al Qaeda and the a
lot of the difficulties we are facing
today so we can't ignore those lessons
of history now on this issue of aiding
Pakistan if you're gonna aim a gun at
somebody George Shultz our great
Secretary of State told me once you
better be prepared to pull the trigger
I'm not prepared at this time to cut off
aid to Pakistan so I'm not prepared to
threaten it as Senator Obama apparently
wants to do as he has said that he would
announce military strikes in the
Pakistan we've got to get the support of
the people of Pakistan he said that he
would launch military strikes into
Pakistan now you don't do that you don't
say that out loud if you have to do
things you have to do things and you
work with the Pakistani government now
the new president of Pakistan could re
has got his hands full and this area on
the border is I've not been governed
since the days of Alexander the Great
I've been
Wazir Stan I can see how tough that
terrain is it's ruled by a handful of
tribes and yes senator Obama calls for
more troops but what he doesn't
understand it's got to be us new
strategy the same strategy that he
condemned in Iraq that's going to have
to be employed in Afghanistan and we're
gonna have to help the Pakistanis go
into these areas and obtain the
allegiance of the people and it's going
to be tough
they've intermarried with al Qaeda and
the Taliban and it's going to be tough
but we have to get the cooperation of
the people in those areas and the
Pakistanis are going to have to
understand that that bombing in the
Marriott hotel in Islamabad was a signal
from the terrorists that they don't want
that government to cooperate with us in
combating the Taliban Taliban and
jihadist elements so we've got a lot of
work to do in Afghanistan but I'm
confident now the general petraeus is in
the new position of command that we will
employ a strategy which not only means
additional troops and by the way there
have been 20,000 additional troops from
32 to 53,000 and there needs to be more
so it's not just the addition of troops
that matters it's a strategy that will
succeed in Pakistan is a very important
element in this and I know how to work
with them and I guarantee you I would
not publicly state that I'm going to
attack them nobody talked about
attacking Pakistan here's what I said
and if John wants to disagree with us he
can let me know that if the United
States has al Qaeda
bin Laden top-level lieutenants in our
sights and Pakistan is unable or
unwilling to act then we should take
them out now I think that's the right
strategy I think that's the right policy
and John I you're absolutely right that
presidents have to be prudent in what
they say but you know coming from you
you know in the past that threatened
extinction for North Korea and you know
sung songs about bombing Iran I don't
know you know how credible that is I
think this is the right strategy now
Senator McCain is also right that it's
difficult this is not an
easy situation you've got cross-border
attacks against US troops and we've got
a choice we could allow our troops to
just be on the defensive and absorb
those blows again and again and again if
Pakistan is unwilling to cooperate or we
have to start making some decisions and
that the problem John with the strategy
that's been pursued was that for 10
years we coddled Musharraf we alienated
the Pakistani population because we were
anti-democratic we had a
twentieth-century mindset that basically
said well you know he may be a dictator
but he's our dictator and as a
consequence we lost legitimacy in
Pakistan we spent 10 billion dollars and
in the meantime they weren't going after
al-qaeda and they are more powerful now
than any time since we began the war in
Afghanistan that's going to change when
I'm pressing the United States I don't
think that Senator Obama understands
that there was a failed state in
Pakistan when Musharraf came to power
everybody who was around then and had
been there and knew about it knew that
there was a failed state but let me tell
you you know this business about bombing
Iran and all that let me tell you my
record back in 1983 when I was a
brand-new United States congressman want
the person I admired the most and still
admire the most Ronald Reagan wanted to
send Marines into Lebanon and I saw that
and I saw the situation and I stood up
and I voted against that because I was
afraid that they couldn't make peace in
a place where 300 or 400 or several
hundred Marines would make a difference
tragically I was right
nearly 300 Marines lost their lives in
the bombing of the barracks and then we
had Somalia then we had the first Gulf
War I supported I supported that I
supported us going into Bosnia when a
number of my own party and colleagues
was against that operation in Bosnia it
was the right thing to do to stop
genocide and to preserve what was
necessary inside of Europe
I supported what we did in Kosovo I
supported it because ethnic cleansing
and genocide was taking place there and
I have a record and Somalia I opposed
that we should turn turned the force in
Somalia from a peacekeeping force into a
peacemaking force which they were not
capable of so I have a record I have a
record of being involved in these
national security issues which involved
the highest responsibility and the
toughest decisions that any president
can make and that is to send our young
men and women in the harm's way and I'll
tell you I had a town hall meeting in
Wolfeboro New Hampshire and a woman
stood up and she said Senator McCain I
want you to do me the honor of wearing a
bracelet with my son's name on it he was
22 years old and he was killed in combat
outside of Baghdad Mathew Stanley before
Christmas last year this was last August
a year ago and I said I will I will wear
his bracelet with honor and this was
August a year ago and then she said but
Senator McCain I want you to do
everything promise me one thing that
you'll do everything in your power to
make sure that my son's death was not in
vain that means that that mission
succeeds just like those young people
who Rhian listed in Baghdad just like
the mother I met at the airport the
other day whose son was killed and they
all say to me that we don't want defeat
I know what it's like when an army is
defeated a war that I was in where we
had an army it wasn't through any fault
of their own but they were defeated and
I know how hard it is to root for that
for an army and a military to recover
from that
and it did and we will win this one and
we won't come home and defeat and
dishonor and probably have to go back if
we fail let me just make a point I've
got a bracelet too from sergeant from
the mother of Sergeant Ryan David Joe
Peck given to me in Green Bay and she
asked me can you please make sure that
another mother is not going through what
I'm going through
yeah they know US soldier ever dies in
vain
because they are carrying out the
missions of their commander-in-chief and
we honor all the service that they've
provided and they've our troops have
performed brilliantly the question is
for the next president are we making
good judgments about how to keep America
safe
precisely because sending our military
into battle is such an enormous step and
the point that I originally made is that
we took our eye off Afghanistan we took
our eye off the folks who perpetrated
9/11 they are still sending out
videotapes and Senator McCain nobody's
talking about defeat in Iraq but you
know I have to say that we are having
enormous problems in Afghanistan because
of that decision and it is not true that
you have consistently been concerned
about what happened in Afghanistan I
mean and at one point while you were
focused on Iraq you said well we can
muddle through Afghanistan you don't
muddle through the Central run on terror
and you don't muddle through going after
bin Laden you don't muddle through
stamping out the Taliban I think that is
something that we have to take seriously
and when I'm president I will you might
you might think that with that kind of
concern that Senator Obama would have
gone to Afghanistan particularly given
his responsibilities as the subcommittee
chairman and by the way when I'm
subcommittee chairman we take up the
issues under my subcommittee but the
important thing is the important thing
is I visited Afghanistan and I've
traveled to Waziristan and I've traveled
these places and I know what our
security requirements are and I know
what our needs are and so the point is
that we will prevail in Afghanistan but
we need the new strategy and we need it
to succeed but the important thing is if
we suffer defeat in Iraq which General
Petraeus predicts we will if we adopted
senator Obama's set date for withdrawal
then that will have a calamitous effect
on Afghanistan and American national
security interest in the region Senator
Obama doesn't seem to understand there's
a connection between the two
I have some good news and bad news for
the two of you you all are even on time
which is remarkable surgery you know
we've been going at it more to you Jim I
don't know about that but the bad news
is that all my little five-minute things
have run over so anyhow we'll adjust as
we as we get there but the amount of
time is even new new new lead question
and it goes two minutes to you Senator
McCain what is your reading of the
threat from Iran right now to the
security of the United States my reading
of the threat from Iran is that if Iran
acquires nuclear weapons it's an
existential threat to the State of
Israel and it is a threat in the region
because the other countries in the
region will feel a compelling
requirement to acquire nuclear weapons
as well now we cannot allow a second
Holocaust let's just make that very
clear
but I have proposed for a long time and
I've had conversation with foreign
leaders about forming a league of
democracies let's be clear and let's
have some straight talk the Russians are
preventing significant action in the
United Nations Security Council I have
proposed a league of democracies a group
of people a group of countries that
share common interests common values
common ideals and they also control a
lot of the world's economic power we
could impose significant meaningful
painful sanctions on the Iranians that I
think could have a beneficial effect the
Iranians have a lousy government so
therefore their economy is lousy even
though they have significant oil
revenues so I am convinced that together
we can with the French with the British
with the Germans and other countries are
democracies around the world we can
affect Iranian behavior but have no
doubt but have no doubt that the
Iranians continue on the path to the
acquisition of a nuclear weapon as we
speak tonight and it
seis threat not only in the region but
around the world but I'd also like to
point out the Iranians are putting the
most lethal IEDs into Iraq which are
killing young Americans there are
special groups in Iran that are coming
into Iraq and are being trained in Iran
and there is the or the Republican Guard
in Iran which Senator Kyl had an
amendment in order to declare them a
sponsor of terror senator Obama said
that would be productive provocative so
this is a serious threat this is a
serious threat to the security in the
world and I believe we can act and we
can act with our friends and allies and
and reduce that threat as quickly as
possible but have no doubt about the
ultimate result of them acquiring
nuclear weapons two minutes on Iran well
let me just correct something very
quickly I believe that the Republican
Guard of Iran is a terrorist
organization I've consistently said so
what Senator McCain refers to is a
measure in the Senate that would try to
broaden the mandate inside of Iraq to
deal with Iran and ironically the single
thing that has strengthened Iran over
the last several years has been the war
in Iraq Iraq was Iran's mortal enemy
that was cleared away and what we've
seen over the last several years is
Iran's influence grow they have funded
Hezbollah they have funded Hamas they
have gone from zero centrifuges to four
thousand centrifuges to develop a
nuclear weapon so obviously our policy
over the last eight years has not worked
now Senator McCain is absolutely right
we cannot tolerate a nuclear Iran it
would be a game-changer not only would
it threaten Israel a country that is our
stalwart ally but it would also create
an environment in which you could set up
an arms race in the Middle East now
here's what we need to do we do need
tougher sanctions I do not agree with
Senator McCain that we're going to be
able to execute the kind of sanctions we
need without some cooperation from
countries like Russia and
that our I think Senator McCain would
agree not democracies but have extensive
trade with Iran but potentially have an
interest in making sure Iran doesn't
have a nuclear weapon but we're also
going to have to I believe engage in
tough direct diplomacy with Iran and
this is a major difference that I have
with Senator McCain this notion that by
not talking to people we are punishing
them has not worked it has not worked in
Iran it has not worked in North Korea in
each instance our our efforts at
isolation have actually accelerated
their efforts to get nuclear weapons
that will change when I'm president the
United States Senator what about talking
well Senator Obama twice said in debates
that he would sit down with Ahmed in
Ishod Chavez and Raul Castro without
precondition without precondition now
here is augmented energy rockman energy
awed who is Ahmed Energy odd who is now
in New York talking about the
extermination of the State of Israel of
wiping Israel off the map and we're
going to sit down without precondition
across the table to legitimize and give
a propaganda platform to a person that
is espousing the extermination of the
State of Israel and therefore then
giving them more credence in the world
arena and therefore saying they've
probably been doing the right thing
because you will sit down across the
table from them and that will legitimize
their illegal behavior the point is that
throughout history whether it be Ronald
Reagan who wouldn't sit down with
Brezhnev and drop off a fern inko until
Gorbachev was ready with glass now stand
perestroika or whether it be Nixon's
trip to China which was preceded by
Henry Kissinger look many times before
he went look I'll sit down with anybody
but there's got to be preconditions and
those preconditions would apply that we
wouldn't legitimize with a face-to-face
meeting a person like Ahmed any guy
now senator Obama said without
precondition right so let's talk about
this first of all I made dinner John's
not the most powerful person in Iran so
he may not be the right person to talk
to but I reserve the right as president
United States to meet with anybody at a
time and place of my choosing if I think
it's gonna keep America safe and I'm
glad that Senator McCain brought up the
history the bipartisan history of us
engaging in direct diplomacy
Senator McCain mentioned Henry Kissinger
who's one of his advisors who along with
five recent secretaries of state just
said that we should meet with Iran guess
what without precondition this is one of
your own advisors now understand what
this means without preconditions it
doesn't mean that you invite them over
for tea one day what it means is that we
don't do what we've been doing which is
to say until you agree to do exactly
what we say we won't have direct
contacts with you
there's a difference between
preconditions and preparation of course
we've got to do preparations starting
with low-level diplomatic talks and it
may not work because Iran is a rogue
regime but I will point out that I was
called naive when I suggested that we
need to look at exploring contacts with
Iran and you know what President Bush
recently sent a senior ambassador bill
birnes to participate in talks with the
Europeans around the issue of nuclear
weapons again it may not work but if it
doesn't work then we have strengthened
our ability to form alliances to impose
the tough sanctions that Senator McCain
just mentioned and when we haven't done
it as in North Korea let me just take
one more example in North Korea we cut
off talks there a member of the axis of
evil we can't deal with them and you
know what happened they went they
quadrupled their nuclear capacity they
tested a nuke they tested missiles they
pulled out of the non-proliferation
agreement
and they sent nuclear secrets
potentially to countries like Syria when
we re-engage because again the Bush
administration reversed course on this
then we have at least made some progress
although right now because of the
problems in North Korea we are seeing it
on shaky ground and and and I just sorry
I just have to make the this general
point that the Bush administration some
senator McCain's own advisors all think
this is important and Senator McCain
appears resistant he even said the other
day that he would not meet potentially
with the prime minister of Spain because
he said you know he wasn't sure whether
they were aligned with us I mean Spain
Spain is a NATO ally if we can't meet
with our friends I don't know how we're
going to lead the the world in terms of
dealing with critical issues like
terrorism I'm not going to set the White
House visitors scheduled before I
impress the United States I don't even
have a seal yet look dr. Kissinger did
not say that he would approve a
face-to-face meetings between the
President of the United States and the
president achmad energon he did not say
of course he said that there could be
secretary level and lower level meetings
I've always encouraged them the Iranians
have met with ambassador Crocker in
Baghdad that what senator Obama doesn't
seem to understand that if without
precondition you sit down across the
table from someone who is called Israel
a stinking corpse and wants to destroy
that country and wipe it off the map you
legitimize those comments this is
dangerous
it isn't just naive it's dangerous and
so we just have a fundamental difference
of opinion as far as North Korea is
concerned our Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright went to North Korea
by the way North Korean most repressive
and brutal regime probably on earth the
average South Korean is 3 inches taller
than the average North Korea a huge
gulag we don't know what the status of
the Dear Leader's health is today but we
know this that the North Korean
have broken every agreement that they've
entered into and we ought to go back to
a little bit of Ronald Reagan's trust
but verify and certainly not sit down
across the table from without
precondition as Senator Obama said he
did twice I mean it's just
Senator McCain keeps on using this
example that suddenly the president
would just meet with somebody without
doing any preparation without having low
level talks nobody's been talking about
that the Senator McCain knows it this is
a mischaracterization in my position
when we talk about preconditions and
Henry Kissinger did say we should have
contacts without preconditions the idea
is that we do not expect to solve every
problem before we initiate talks and you
know the Bush administration has come to
recognize that it hasn't worked this
notion that we are simply silent when it
comes to our enemies and the notion that
we would sit with Ahmadinejad and not
say anything while he's spewing his
nonsense and and his vile comments is
ridiculous nobody was even talking to me
get this right we sit down with Ahmed
energon and he says we're gonna wipe
Israel off the face of the earth and we
say no you're not yeah please by the way
dr. Kissinger who's been my friend for
35 years
would be interested to hear this
conversation and center around the
affection of his of his positions on the
issue
I've known him for 35 years and I look
he would not he would not say that
Presidential top-level Courage's and
other people encourage contacts and
negotiations and all other things we do
that all the time we're gonna go to an
Obama is parsing words when he says
great condition means preparation I'm
not Muslim parsing or using my first
name words that your advisers use please
go no lead question Russia goes to you
two minutes senator Obama how do you see
the relationship with Russia do you see
him as a competitor do you see him as an
enemy do you see him as a potential
partner
I think that given what's happened over
the last several weeks and months our
entire Russian approach has to be
evaluated because a resurgent and very
aggressive Russia is a threat to the
peace and stability of the region their
actions in Georgia were unacceptable
they were unwarranted and at this point
it is absolutely critical for the next
president to make clear that we have to
follow through on our six-party or that
the six-point ceasefire they have to
remove themselves from South Ossetia and
Abkhazia it is absolutely important that
we have a unified alliance and that we
explained to the Russians that you
cannot be a 21st century superpower
or power and act like a 20th century
dictatorship and we also have to affirm
all the fledgling democracies in that
region
you know the Estonians the Lithuanian
latvia's the poles the Czechs that we
are in fact going to be supportive and
in solidarity with them in their efforts
they are members of NATO and two
countries like Georgia and the Ukraine I
think we have to insist that they are
free to join NATO if they meet the
requirements and they should have a
membership action plan immediately to
start bringing them in now we also can't
return to a cold war posture with
respect to Russia it's important that we
recognize there are going to be some
areas of common interest one is nuclear
proliferation they have not only 15,000
nuclear warheads but they've got enough
to make another 40,000 and some of those
Lewton loose nukes could fall into the
hands of al Qaeda this is an area where
I've led on in the Senate working with a
Republican ranking member of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee Dick Lugar
to deal with the proliferation of loose
nuclear weapons that's an area where
we're going to have to work with Russia
but we have to have a president who is
clear that you don't deal with Russia
based on staring into his eyes and
seeing his soul you deal with Russia
based on what are your what are the
national security interests of the
United States of America and we have to
recognize that
the way they've been behaving lately
demands a sharp response from the
international community and our allies
two minutes on on Russia under McCain
well I was interested in Senator Obama's
reaction to the Russian aggression
against Georgia his first statement was
both sides ought to show restraint again
a little bit of naivete there he doesn't
understand that Russia committed serious
aggression against Georgia and Russia
has now become a nation fueled by petrol
dollars that is basically a KGB
apparatchik run government
I looked into mr. Putin's eyes and I saw
three letters a K G and a B and their
aggression in Georgia is not acceptable
behavior I don't believe we're going to
go back to the Cold War I am sure that
that will not happen but I do believe
that we need to bolster our friends and
allies and that wasn't just about a
problem between Georgia and Russia it
had everything to do with energy as a
pipeline runs from the Caspian through
Georgia through Turkey and of course we
know that the Russians control other
sources of energy into Europe which they
have used from time to time it's not
accidental that the presidents of Latvia
Estonia Lithuania Poland and Ukraine
flew to Georgia fluted tube Lisi where I
have spent significant amount of time
with a great young president Misha
Saakashvili and they showed solidarity
with them but also they are very
concerned about the Russian threats to
regain their status of the old Russian
Empire now I think the Russians ought to
understand that we will support we the
United States will support the inclusion
of Georgia and Ukraine and and the the
natural process inclusion into NATO we
also ought to make it very clear that
the Russians are in violation of their
ceasefire agreement they have stationed
additional troops in Abkhazia and South
Ossetia by the way I went there once and
we went inside and drove in and there
was a huge
and this is this is Georgian territory
and there was a huge picture of Vladimir
Putin and it said Vladimir Putin our
president it was very clear the Russian
intentions towards Georgia they were
just waiting to seize the opportunity so
this is a very difficult situation we
want to work with the Russians but we
also have every right to expect the
Russians to behave in a fashion in
keeping with a with a with a country who
respects international boundaries and
the norms of international behavior and
watch Ukraine this whole thing is a gut
a lot to do with Ukraine Crimea the base
of the Russian fleet in Sevastopol and
the breakdown of the political process
in Ukraine between Timoshenko and
Yushchenko is a very serious problem
so watch Ukraine and let's make sure
that we that the Ukrainians understand
that we are their friend and Ally see
major differences what he just said no
actually I think Senator McCain and I
agree for the most part on these issues
obviously I disagree with this notion
that somehow we did not forcefully
object Russians going into Georgia I
immediately said that this was illegal
and objectionable and absolutely I
wanted a cessation of the violence
because it put an enormous strain on
Georgia and that's why I was the first
to say that we have to rebuild the
Georgian economy and called for a
billion dollars that has now gone in to
help them rebuild because part of
Russia's intentions here was to weaken
the economy to the point where President
Saakashvili was so weakened that he
might be replaced by somebody that Putin
favored more two points that I think are
important to think about when it comes
to Russia
number one is we have to have foresight
and anticipate some of these problems so
back in April I warned the
administration that you had Russian
peacekeepers in Georgian territory that
made no sense whatsoever and what we
need to do was replace them with
international peacekeepers and a special
and
boy to resolve the crisis before it
boiled over that wasn't done but had it
been done it's possible we could have
avoided the issue the second point I
want to make is the the issue of energy
Russia is in part resurgent and Putin is
feeling powerful because of Petro
dollars the Senator McCain mentioned
that means that we as one of the biggest
consumers of oil 25% of the world's oil
have to have an energy strategy not just
to deal with Russia but to deal with
many of the rogue states we talked about
Iran Venezuela and that means yes
increasing domestic production and
offshore drilling but we only have 3% of
the world's oil supplies and we use 25%
of the world's oil so we can't simply
drill our way out of the problem what
we're gonna have to do is to approach it
through alternative energy like solar
and wind and biodiesel and yes nuclear
energy clean coal technology and you
know I've got a plan for us to make a
significant investment over the next 10
years to do that yeah and I have to say
Senator McCain and I I think agree on
the importance of energy but Senator
McCain mentioned earlier the importance
of looking at a record over 26 years
Senator McCain voted 23 times against
alternative energy like solar and wind
and biodiesel and and so we got out
we've got to walk the walk and not just
talk the talk when it comes to energy
independence because this is probably
going to be just as vital for our
economy and the the pain that people are
feeling at the pump and you know winners
come in and home heating oil as it is
our national security and the issue of
climate change that's so important we've
got time for one more lead question
segment we're way out of quick responses
no wonder than Arizona it's against
solar and senator Obama says he's for
nuclear but he's against reprocessing
and he's against storing so that's hard
to get from them I'm sorry their
offshore drilling is also something that
is very important and it is a bridge and
we know that if we drill offshore and
exploit a lot of these reserve
it will help at least temporarily
relieve our energy requirements and it
will have I think an important effect on
I supported nunn-lugar back in the early
1990s when a lot of my colleagues didn't
that was the key legislation at the time
and put us on the road to eliminating
this issue of nuclear waste and yes the
nuclear fuel it has to be taken care I
just have to correct the record here I
have never said that I object to nuclear
waste what I've said is that we have to
store it safely alright and and Senator
McCain he says thoughts about Arizona
I've got to make this point Jim okay my
time no one can can be opposed to
alternative let's move on you got one
more last lead question you have two
minutes each and the question is this
beginning with you Senator McCain what
do you think the likelihood is that
there would be another 9/11 type attack
on the continental United States I think
it's much less than it was the day after
9/11 I think it that we have a safer
nation but we are a long way from safe
and I want to tell you that one of the
things I'm most proud of among other
because I have worked across the aisle I
have a long record on that on a long
series of reforms but after 9/11
Genet Senator Joe Lieberman and I
decided that we needed a commission and
that was a commission to investigate
9/11 and find out what happened and fix
it and we were we were opposed by the
administration another area where I
differed with this administration and we
were steaming until the families of 9/11
came and they descended on Washington
and we got that legislation passed and
there were a series of recommendations
as I recall more than 40 and I'm happy
to say that we've gotten written in the
law most of those reforms recommended by
that Commission I'm proud of that work
again bipartisan reaching across the
aisle working together Democrat and
Republican alike so we
have a long way to go in our
intelligence services we have to do a
better job in human intelligence and
we've got to to make sure that we have
people who are trained interrogators so
that we don't ever torture a prisoner
ever again we have to make sure that our
technological and intelligence
capabilities are better we have to work
more closely with our allies I know our
allies and I can work much more closely
with them but I can tell you that I
think America is safer today than it was
in 911 but that doesn't mean that we
don't have a long way to go and I'd like
to remind you also as a result of those
recommendations we probably had the
largest reorganization of government
since we established the Defense
Department and I think that those men
and women and those agencies are doing a
great job but we still have a long way
to go before we can declare America safe
and that means doing a better job along
our borders as well
two minutes senator Obama well first of
all I think that we are safer in some
ways obviously we've poured billions of
dollars into airport security we have
done some work in terms of securing
potential targets but we still have a
long way to go we've got to make sure
that we're hardening our chemical sites
we haven't done enough in terms of
transit we haven't done enough in terms
of ports and the biggest threat that we
face right now is not a nuclear missile
coming over the skies it's in a suitcase
this is why the issue of nuclear
proliferation is so important it is the
the biggest threat to the United States
is a terrorist getting a hands on
nuclear weapons and we we are spending
billions of dollars on missile defense
and I actually believe that we need
missile defense because of Iran and
North Korea and the potential for them
to obtain or to launch nuclear weapons
but I also believe that when we are only
spending a few hundred million dollars
on nuclear proliferation then we're
making a mistake the other thing that we
have to focus on though is al Qaeda they
are now operating in 60 countries
we can't simply be focused on Iraq we
have to go to the root cause and that is
in Afghanistan and Pakistan that's going
to be critical we are going to need more
cooperation with our allies and one last
point I want to make it is important for
us to understand that the way we are
perceived in the world is going to make
a difference in terms of our capacity to
get cooperation and root out terrorism
and one of the things that I intend to
do as president is to restore America's
standing in the world we are less
respected now than we were eight years
ago or even four years ago and this is
the greatest country on Earth
but because of some of the mistakes that
have been made and I give Senator McCain
great credit on the torture issue for
having identified that as something that
undermines our long-term security
because of those things we I think are
gonna have a lot of work to do in the
next administration to restore that
sense that America's that shining beacon
on a hill you agree there's much to be
done in an administration to restore
welcome over PA but in the case of
missile defense Senator Obama said it
had to be quote proven that wasn't
proven when Ronald Reagan said we would
do SDI which is missile defense and it
was major a major factor in bringing
about the end of the Cold War we seem to
come full circle again senator Obama
still doesn't quite understand or
doesn't get it that if we fail in Iraq
it encourages al Qaeda they would
establish a base in Iraq with that the
consequences of defeat which would
result from his plan of withdrawal and
according to date certain regardless of
conditions according to our military
leaders according to every expert would
lead to defeat possible defeat loss of
all the fragile sacrifice that we've
made of American blood and treasure
which grieves us all all of that would
be lost if we followed senator Obama's
plan to have specific dates would
withdraw regardless of conditions on the
ground and General Petraeus says we have
had great success but it's very fragile
and we can't do what senator Obama wants
to do that is the central issue of our
time and I think America
we'll judge very seriously as to whether
that's the right path or the wrong path
and who should be the next president the
United States you see the same
connections that Senator there's no
doubt look over the last eight years
this administration along with Senator
McCain have been solely focused on Iraq
that has been their priority that has
been where all our resources have gone
in the meantime
bin Laden is still out there he is not
captured he is not killed al Qaeda is
resurgent in the meantime we've got
challenges for example with China where
we are borrowing billions of dollars
they now hold a trillion dollars worth
of our debt and they are active in
countries like in in regions like Latin
America and Asia and Africa they are the
the conspicuousness of their presence is
only matched by our absence because
we've been focused on Iraq we have
weakened our capacity to project power
around the world because we have viewed
everything through this single lens
not to mention look at our economy we
are now spending 10 or billion dollars
or more every month and that means we
can't provide health care to people who
need it we can't invest in science and
technology which will determine whether
or not we are going to be competitive in
the long term there has never been a
country on earth that saw its economy
decline and yet maintained its military
superiority so this is a national
security issue
we haven't adequately funded veterans
care I sit on the Veterans Affairs
Committee and we've got I meet veterans
all across the country who are trying to
figure out how can I get disability
payments I've got post-traumatic stress
disorder and yet I can't get treatment
so we have put all chips in right there
and nobody is talking about losing this
war what we were talking about is
recognizing that the next president has
to have a broader strategic vision about
all the challenges that we face that's
been missing over the last eight years
that sense is something that I want to
restore
I've been involved as I mentioned you
before and virtually every major
national security challenge we faced in
the last 20-some years there are some
advantages to experience and knowledge
and judgment and I and I honestly don't
believe that Senator Obama has the
knowledge or experience and has made the
wrong judgments in a number of areas
including his initial reaction to
Russian of age in aggression in Georgia
to his you know we've seen the
stubbornness before in this
administration to cling through a belief
that somehow the the surge has not
succeeded and failing to acknowledge
that he was wrong about the surge is
shows to me that we that we need more
flexibility in a President of the United
States than that as far as our other
issues that he brought up our concern I
know the veterans I know them well and I
know that they know that I'll take care
of them and I've been proud of their
support and their in their recognition
of my service to the veterans and I love
them and I'll take care of them and they
know that I'll take care of them and
that's going to be my job but also I
have the ability and the knowledge in
the background to might make the right
judgments to keep this country safe and
secure we form prosperity and peace
these are major challenges to the United
States of America I don't think I need
any on-the-job training I'm ready to go
at it right now well let me just make a
closing point my father came from Kenya
that's where I get my name and in the
60s he wrote letter after letter to come
to college here in the United States
because the notion was that there was no
other country on earth where you could
make it if you try the ideals and the
values of the United States inspired the
entire world I don't think any of us can
say that our standing in the world now
the way children around the world look
at the United States is the same
and part of what we need to do what the
next president has to do and this is
part of our judgment this is part of how
we are going to keep America safe is to
send a message to the world that we are
going to invest in issues like education
we are going to invest in issues that
that relate to how ordinary people are
able to live out their dreams and that
is something that I'm going to be
committed to as president United States
seconds we're almost finished Jim when I
came home from prison I saw our veterans
being very badly treated
and it made me sad and I embarked on an
effort to resolve the PIO wmia issue
which we did in a bipartisan fashion and
then I worked on normalization of
relations between our two countries so
that our veterans could come all the way
home I guarantee you as surprised in the
United States I know how to heal the
wounds of war I know how to deal with
our adversaries and I know how to deal
with our friends and that ends this
debate tonight on October 2nd next
Thursday also at 9 p.m. Eastern Time the
two vice presidential candidates will
debate at Washington University in st.
Louis my PBS colleague Gwen Ifill will
be the moderator for now from Oxford
Mississippi Thank You senators both I'm
Jim Lehrer thank you and good night
[Applause]